---
title: "Spectral Wavelet Dropout: Regularization in the Wavelet Domain"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-09-29-swd
excerpt: 'This work introduces Spectral Wavelet Dropout (SWD), a novel regularization method that includes two variants: 1D-SWD and 2D-SWD. These variants improve CNN generalization by randomly dropping detailed frequency bands in the discrete wavelet decomposition of feature maps.'
date: 2024-09-29
venue: 'ICMLA'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.18951'
citation: 'Rinor Cakaj, Jens Mehnert, Bin Yang. &quot;Spectral Wavelet Dropout: Regularization in the Wavelet Domain.&quot; <i>ICMLA 2024</i>.'
---

## Abstract
Regularization techniques help prevent overfitting
and therefore improve the ability of convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) to generalize. One reason for overfitting is the
complex co-adaptations among different parts of the network,
which make the CNN dependent on their joint response rather
than encouraging each part to learn a useful feature representation
independently. Frequency domain manipulation is a powerful
strategy for modifying data that has temporal and spatial
coherence by utilizing frequency decomposition. This work introduces
Spectral Wavelet Dropout (SWD), a novel regularization
method that includes two variants: 1D-SWD and 2D-SWD. These
variants improve CNN generalization by randomly dropping
detailed frequency bands in the discrete wavelet decomposition
of feature maps. Our approach distinguishes itself from the preexisting
Spectral “Fourier” Dropout (2D-SFD), which eliminates
coefficients in the Fourier domain. Notably, SWD requires only a
single hyperparameter, unlike the two required by SFD. We also
extend the literature by implementing a one-dimensional version
of Spectral “Fourier” Dropout (1D-SFD), setting the stage for
a comprehensive comparison. Our evaluation shows that both
1D and 2D SWD variants have competitive performance on
CIFAR-10/100 benchmarks relative to both 1D-SFD and 2DSFD.
Specifically, 1D-SWD has a significantly lower computational
complexity compared to 1D/2D-SFD. In the Pascal VOC
Object Detection benchmark, SWD variants surpass 1D-SFD and
2D-SFD in performance and demonstrate lower computational
complexity during training.

[\[Download paper here\]](/files/SWD_ICMLA_2024.pdf)
[\[ArXiv\]](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.18951)
